---
layout: post
title:  "my new setup for a (reasonably) lightweight and private desktop"
date:   2023-07-02 00:00:00 +0200
categories: tech, privacy
---

This year, I decided to make the switch to Linux as my main daily driver for most tasks. After hopping between distros a few times and trying different combinations of software, I found an optimal setup that satisfies all my current needs: lightweight, functional, and reasonably secure.

First, some context. I've had some experience with Linux before, even though it was limited to beginner-friendly distros like Ubuntu, Linux Mint, and Elementary OS. This time I went all in and installed Archcraft without even reading much about rolling release distributions. Archcraft is decent, but I have some complaints about it. Despite being "very minimal and lightweight", it feels bloated and is hard to customize with many different interconnected components (window managers, dock, status bar, etc.) thrown together, so it's not that easy to remove the things you don't need. (Well, maybe it *is* possible and I'm just a noob and a normie.) All of this is okay and tolerable until things start breaking big time. Of course, things going awry from time to time is something to be expected for a rolling release distro. But when you have so many packages with so many dependencies, the number of things that can break grows too. And when you have no idea what, when, or how something went wrong, you either have to put up with it and hope for an eventual resolution or spend more time fixing stuff than actually working.

However, there are two things I love about Arch that also apply to Archcraft: package management and low resource usage. Whether you want to update the system or install a new package, you use the pacman package manager. Really straightforward, and a good package manager is not rocket science these days. (Yet, when we get to Fedora, you'll see why I'm putting so much emphasis on this.) In addition to the main repositories, there is AUR, a community collection of packages where you can find practically anything. Clone the AUR git repository, run one command, and you're all set. There is no need to manually search for sources and compile them yourself. Even more, many packages have binary variants, so you don't have to compile things at all, which, of course, is faster.

When it comes to performance, Arch is fast. Of course, it depends on the desktop environment or window manager that you are using, active processes, and many other things, but having an OS with very moderate resource usage out of the box definitely helps. And if you want to have some bells, whistles, and visual delights, it will not get in your way. Also, a lack of telemetry services contributes to reducing the usage of resources a lot.

Yet, after using Archcraft for a few months and getting too frustrated with things constantly breaking, I eventually gave up and switched to Fedora. It's such a good all-rounder that I have trouble justifying why I left it. It's stable, looks pretty, with brilliant hardware integration, and has everything you need, regardless of the tasks you do with the computer. The default variant with the GNOME desktop environment is the closest to a MacOS-like experience you can probably get. But I absolutely hated Fedora's package management. You have GNOME Software, an equivalent of the AppStore, and a dnf package manager, the former being just a fancy facade for the latter. And dnf is painfully [slow](https://libreddit.de/r/Fedora/comments/x7ym7l/new_to_fedora_how_to_speed_up_dnf/), even if you configure caching or closest mirror lookup or whatever. Then there's Flatpak, which I see absolutely no use for. Maybe one day, when it will be the default package manager shared between several distros, it will make more sense, but for now it just seems redundant. Also, while GNOME definitely looks nice, it's noticeably heavier even on a decent machine and doesn't feel as snappy. And, even if I switched to Openbox, I'd still have to deal with DNF and flatpaks, so I decided to look elsewhere.

After some searching, here is my ultimate setup for a (reasonably) lightweight and private desktop. This includes some basic things, such as the OS and desktop environment, as well as software choices for my daily tasks.

# Current setup

- **Hardware**. 1st Gen ThinkPad T14. It's powerful enough for whatever I do on a daily basis, but I do wish I had a machine with a good GPU sometimes.
- **Operating System**. [Artix Linux](https://artixlinux.org/) with OpenRC (because [systemd bad](https://nosystemd.org/)) and XFCE desktop environment. Artix is minimal, and its official ISOs have almost no pre-installed software, which is exactly what I was looking for. I like XFCE because it's lightweight, looks pretty, and has a cute mouse as part of its logo. Besides, my first encounter with XFCE was way back in 2012 (I even still have a Xubuntu 12.04 DVD! And it still boots into Live CD mode!!), so nostalgia is a factor too.
- **Terminal emulator and shell**. Since I use XFCE for my desktop environment, I've settled on a default terminal program. As long as it has tabs, I'm fine with it. For a shell, I absolutely love [fish](https://fishshell.com/). Not only does it look beautiful, but the tab autocompletions are a huge time-saver, whether I'm typing the same commands over and over again, or trying to look up a package whose name I don't fully know.
- **Browser**. I use two browsers: [GNU IceCat](https://www.gnu.org/software/gnuzilla/) hardened with a bunch of extensions as a main driver, and [ungoogled-chromium](https://github.com/ungoogled-software/ungoogled-chromium), which I use exclusively for browsing some especially obnoxious websites that don't work in IceCat but I still have to use for some reasons. The main reasons for picking IceCat instead of Firefox: it's [not spyware](https://spyware.neocities.org/articles/icecat), it's clean from [Mozilla's](https://digdeeper.neocities.org/articles/mozilla) filth, and it has a cat in its name and as part of its logo. ungoogled-chromium is good too; feel free to use it if you don't want a Firefox-based browser.

> I tried using [webbrowser](https://git.nuegia.net/webbrowser.git/), which is a fork of Pale Moon, but it doesn't load a good share of websites. I wouldn't mind not being able to browse GitHub but not being able to load a list of SearX instances on searx.space is a different thing.

- **Browser add-ons**
- **uMatrix**. Gives complete control over the requests that a web page makes. Is used to block trackers and analytics, scripts, frames, and other stuff you absolutely don't need. DigDeeper has a great article on uMatrix and other [essential privacy add-ons](https://digdeeper.neocities.org/articles/addons).
- **Canvas Defender**. Generates random noise to hide the canvas fingerprint.
- **Decentraleyes**. Local CDN emulation. Blocks [Clownflare](https://0xacab.org/my-privacy-dns/deCloudflare/-/blob/master/README.md) and the like, serving JS libraries locally instead.
- **I still don't care about cookies**. Because I really don't care about cookies. I have 3rd party cookies blocked by default, and uMatrix takes care of the rest, so cookie consent banners mean absolutely nothing to me anyway.
- **Privacy Redirect**. Redirects known websites (like YouTube, Reddit, etc.) to alternative front-ends: Invidious, libreddit, etc. Sometimes alternative instances go offline, but you can swap them, even for your own one, in the settings.
- **Privacy Settings**. This one is in the quality-of-life category, giving quick access to the browser's privacy configurations.
- **Pure URL**. Removes URL parameters like *utm_source*.
- **User-Agent Switcher and Manager**. User agent spoofer because websites don't need to know my real browser and operating system.
- **Password manager**. I'm not interested in my passwords going into the public domain, so I don't use any cloud-based password managers. My go-to choice is [KeePassXC](https://keepassxc.org/). For added security, I removed the *.kdbx* file extension and renamed it to something completely unrelated.
- **E-Mail**. [Claws Mail](https://www.claws-mail.org/) is one of my favorite e-mail clients on the desktop: fast, lightweight, fully featured, and configurable. It doesn't process HTML out of the box but there hasn't been a single day so far when I would've missed HTML in e-mails. I want to *read* the letter, get what I need (2FA code, auth link, or the gist of the matter), and leave. I don't care about your fancy styling.
- **Code Editor**. I admit it: I'm a soydev and, what's even worse, a hobbyist soydev. In my personal projects, I mostly use modern JS frameworks, and the only thing I can do with Vim is exit it. That's why I need a full-featured and user-friendly code editor. [VSCodium](https://vscodium.com/) is my daily driver; it's just like VS Code but without Microsoft telemetry (even though, reportedly, it still makes unsolicited requests).
- **Notes**. Ever since I broke up with Evernote, I have been on the lookout for a new note-taking app. [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) is... fine. I rarely make keyboard-typed notes these days, and Obsidian is reserved for a Zettelkasten-like knowledge management system that I kind of always forget about.
- **Communications**. I use Telegram and Discord both for work and to communicate with friends and family. They both have adequate web versions, and I'd rather use them in a controlled environment of a browser tab where I can see and block unsolicited requests than on my machine.

These are the main categories of programs I use daily. Of course, a lot of work is happening in web apps: to-do lists, collaborative document writing, etc. I'm by no means a purist in anything. I just try things until I find what works for me. Is it functional enough? Is it lightweight? Does it try to spy on me? Sometimes, the best software is hardware: a single 1TB drive replaced my cloud storage, for example. Sometimes, the best software is no software at all.
